NDCube 2 Core API (#51)
sunpy/sunpy-SEP: SEP-0012.md

> # SEP-0012 -- NDCube 2

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# SEP-0012 -- ndcube 2
```

Author: This was actually delbrate. This API is the API of the `NDCube` object. Sure it pulls in the associated classes, but things like collection and sequence are explicitly out of scope here.

Reviewer: AH, good to know.  That should be made explicit in the first sentence of the introduction.

| SEP           | num                                                     |
|---------------|---------------------------------------------------------|

> | title         | NDCube 2                                                |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| title         | ndcube 2                                                |
```

| author(s)     | [Stuart Mumford](https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4217-4642) |
| contact email | stuart@cadair.com                                       |
| date-creation | 2020-10-13                                              |
| type          | standard                                                |
| discussion    |                                                         |
| status        | discussion                                              |

# Introduction

This SEP proposes a redesigned API for the next major version of the ndcube package.
The primary objective of this SEP is to gather as much community feedback on the proposed API before it is released.
This is also a prelude to a future change, long discussed, to have the `GenericMap` class in sunpy core inherit from `NDCube`.
This SEP should therefore also be considered as a discussion of future changes to the `Map` API, as the API proposed here would eventually (with long deprecation) be adopted by map for the functionality provided here.
That being said, details of the migration of Map to this API are out of scope for this SEP, just a discussion of the eventual API to be adopted.

## Background

> The creation of NDCube was originally motivated by the desire to represent and interrogate multi-dimensional solar datasets, such as those collected with the IRIS satellite.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The creation of ndcube was originally motivated by the desire to represent and interrogate multi-dimensional solar datasets, such as those collected with the IRIS satellite.
```

> The fundamental objective of NDCube is to provide a user interface to this data which would **unite the data with the coordinate information describing the data**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fundamental objective of the package's primary class, `NDCube`, is to provide a user interface to this data which would **unite the data with the coordinate information describing the data**.
```

> The value in NDCube is its being able to do array-like operations which are also able to update the coordinate system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The benefit of `NDCube` is its ability to do array-like operations which also update the coordinate system.
```

> In addition to this, NDCube works hard to provide information to the user that describes their data based on the coordinate system information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, `NDCube` works hard to provide information to the user that describes their data based on the coordinate system information.
```

> NDCube also provides simple summary visualisation support included in the object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`NDCube` also provides simple summary visualisation support included in the object.
```

This uses matplotlib to produce quick, coordinate-aware, and interactive visualisations of the data.

> The final major component added in NDCube is the concept of "extra coords" which allows the specification and integration with coordinates describing the data not specified by the primary WCS for the cube.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final major component added in `NDCube` is the concept of "extra coords" which allows the specification and integration with coordinates describing the data not specified by the primary WCS for the cube.
```

## ndcube 2

> NDCube 1.0 was built on the functionality which existed in astropy at the time and provides a very useful foundation for tools such as the sunraster package as well as other efforts to handle multi-dimensional data in Python.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ndcube 1.0 was built on the functionality which existed in astropy at the time and provides a very useful foundation for tools such as the sunraster package as well as other efforts to handle multi-dimensional data in Python.
```

> During the process of writing NDCube 1.0 a lot of potential functionality which could have be added to astropy to improve the WCS support was identified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the process of writing NDCube 1.0 a lot of potential functionality which could be added to astropy to improve the WCS support was identified.
```

> In addition to this in-between the release of NDCube 1.0 and the development of 2.0, various long running projects such as the acceptance and implementation of [APE 14](https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/blob/master/APE14.rst) were completed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to this in-between the release of ndcube 1.0 and the development of 2.0, various long running projects such as the acceptance and implementation of [APE 14](https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/blob/master/APE14.rst) were completed.
```

This means that once many of these brand new features had been implemented in Astropy and gWCS it provided an excellent opportunity to reassess the state of NDCube and to rebase it onto this new WCS functionality.

The main motivation for updating ndcube to use the APE 14 interface was to provide support for gWCS which is being used by the DKIST user tools.
A lot of the other changes presented in this SEP are a consequence of this decision.

## Summary of Changes from ndcube 1

The fundamental change since the original version of ndcube is that the WCS type has been changed to be the High Level API as described by astropy's APE 14.

> This opens a lot of possibilities to the future uses of ndcube as the APE 14 API allows the coordinate system to be described by almost any functional transform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This opens a lot of possibilities to the future uses of `NDCube` as the APE 14 API allows the coordinate system to be described by almost any functional transform.
```

This could be the most common FITS WCS standard, or gWCS or custom implementations for specific facilites with different requirements.

Having made this change, which was a large breaking change from the original API, we reviewed all the existing functionality and API as it was adapted to use the high level WCS interface and the result is presented below.

# Detailed Description

> The API presented here is limited to the two core classes `NDCubeABC` and `ExtraCoordsABC` this is primarily an attempt to limit the discussion in this SEP to the core API and not implementation decisions taken in the development of ndcube.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The API presented here is limited to the two core classes `NDCubeABC` and `ExtraCoordsABC`.
This is primarily an attempt to limit the discussion in this SEP to the core API and not implementation decisions taken in the development of ndcube.
```

If people are interested in the implementation of the proposed API large amounts of it are implemented on the master branch of the [ndcube repository](https://github.com/sunpy/ndcube) or open pull requests.

> The NDCube class inherits the astropy [`NDDataBase`](https://github.com/astropy/astropy/blob/master/astropy/nddata/nddata_base.py#L11) class, including the requirement that the `.wcs` property be a `BaseHighLevelWCS` instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `NDCube` class inherits the astropy [`NDDataBase`](https://github.com/astropy/astropy/blob/master/astropy/nddata/nddata_base.py#L11) class, including the requirement that the `.wcs` property be a `BaseHighLevelWCS` instance.
```

In the following code snippets of the API use the Python type hint syntax as appropriate to highlight accepted types and return types, these are not enforced at runtime.

## NDCube

Below is a class definition for the Abstract Base Class (ABC) for `NDCube`.

> This is to as completely as possible specify the API, including input and return types. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Its purpose is to specify the API as completely as possible, including input and return types. 
```

The behaviour of all the methods should be described by their included docstrings, a version of this (likely out of sync) has been [PRed to ndcube](https://github.com/sunpy/ndcube/pull/304).

```python

class NDCubeABC(astropy.nddata.NDDataBase):

    @abc.abstractmethod

>     def __init__(self,

Reviewer: In defining this API, how particular are we being regarding the order of inputs?

Author: very.

Reviewer: Is NDData defining the ordering of the inputs too?  Because I would otherwise have said `wcs` should be the 2nd input.

Author: Yes, the signature of the constructor is copied from `NDData`.

                 data: "numpy.typing.ArrayLike",
                 uncertainty: Any = None,
                 mask: Any = None,

>                  wcs: Union[BaseLowLevelWCS, BaseHighLevelWCS] = None,

Reviewer: Are we allowing ```wcs``` to be optional in 2.0?  Will we be now generate a default WCS if it's not provided?  I remember advocating for this but also remember @Cadair pushing back.  Or is the idea that at least one of ```wcs``` or ```extra_coords``` must be supplied now that ```extra_coords``` can be represented as WCS-like?

Author: We are not. This API is inherited from NDData, so it is problematic to make it required in the function signature.

As implemented in 2.0 it would still be required.

        the following attributes must be copied unaltered to the returned NDCube:

          * unit
          * meta

        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    @property
    def extra_coords(self) -> "ExtraCoordsABC":
        """
        The extra coordinates associated with this cube.
        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    @property
    def wcs(self) -> BaseHighLevelWCS:
        """
        The WCS transform for the NDCube.

        If a `BaseLowLevelWCS` is provided to the constructor it should be
        "upgraded" to a high level object.
        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    @property
    def array_axis_physical_types(self) -> Iterable[Tuple[str, ...]]:
        """
        Returns the WCS physical types associated with each array axis.

        Returns an iterable of tuples where each tuple corresponds to an array axis and
        holds strings denoting the WCS physical types associated with that array axis.
        Since multiple physical types can be associated with one array axis, tuples can
        be of different lengths. Likewise, as a single physical type can correspond to
        multiple array axes, the same physical type string can appear in multiple tuples.

>         """

Reviewer: Should this only draw physical types from the ```wcs``` or from the ```combined_wcs``` of ```wcs``` and ```extra_coords```?

Should there be a kwarg allowing the user to select which set of physical types (```wcs```, ```extra_coords``` or ```combined_wcs```) to draw from?

Author: Can't do a kwarg without also making this a method. I think I am :+1: on using `combined_wcs` now that property is also in the ABC.

Reviewer 2: Agree that `combined_wcs` is best.

Reviewer 2: After discussions on element, it feels to me like this should have a `wcs` kwarg, aligning it with other methods that have that kwarg.

Author: it's not a method though, and I don't want it to be, I think using combined_wcs is the best idea here anyway.

Reviewer: :+1:

    @abc.abstractmethod
    def axis_world_coords(self,
                          *axes: Union[Union[int, str], Iterable[Union[int, str]]],
                          edges: bool = False) -> Iterable[object]:
        """
        Returns world coordinate values of all pixels for all axes.

        Parameters
        ----------
        axes
            Axis number in numpy ordering or unique substring of
            `.NDCube.wcs.world_axis_physical_types` or
            `.NDCube.wcs.world_axis_names` of axes for which real world
            coordinates are desired. ``axes=None`` implies all axes will be
            returned.

        edges
            The edges argument helps in returning ``pixel_edges``
            instead of ``pixel_values``. Default value is False,
            which returns ``pixel_values``. True return ``pixel_edges``

        Returns
        -------
        axes_coords

>             High level object, or iterable thereof, giving the real world

Reviewer: Should in iterable of high level objects always be returned?  Or if only one coord is returned, should it not be wrapped in an iterable?

Author: I believe it's currently implemented as always returning a tuple. The APE 14 API doesn't return a tuple when `wcs.world_n_dim == 1` so we could choose to change that.

I think on balance I am in favour of always returning the tuple.

Reviewer: I'm fine with that.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            An iterable of High level objects, giving the real world
```

        Example
        -------
        >>> NDCube.all_world_coords(('lat', 'lon'))
        >>> NDCube.all_world_coords(2)

        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    def axis_world_coords_values(self,
                                 *axes: Union[Union[int, str], Iterable[Union[int, str]]],
                                 edges: bool = False) -> Iterable[u.Quantity]:
        """
        Returns world coordinate values of all pixels for all axes.

        Parameters
        ----------
        axes
            Axis number in numpy ordering or unique substring of
            `.NDCube.wcs.world_axis_physical_types` or
            `.NDCube.wcs.world_axis_names` of axes for which real world
            coordinates are desired. ``axes=None`` implies all axes will be
            returned.

        edges
            The edges argument helps in returning ``pixel_edges``
            instead of ``pixel_values``. Default value is False,
            which returns ``pixel_values``. True return ``pixel_edges``

        Returns
        -------
        axes_coords
            `~astropy.units.Quantity` or iterable thereof for all requested

>             world axes, units determined by the wcs.  # TODO: Should we mandate namedtuple?

Reviewer: * Same question as above.  Should an iterable always be returned?

* I vote we DO mandate a ```namedtuple``` because of the significant possibility of ambiguity in determining which returned Quantity corresponds to which axis/physical type.  Even for experienced ndcube developers, this will probably serve as a very useful sanity check at times.

Author: mandating the namedtuple in the ABC adds a significant amount of complexity to the ABC specification. Given that for `axes=False` its `zip(return self.array_axis_physical_types)` I am not sure it's worth the burden.

Author: @DanRyanIrish and I discussed this out of band and agreed that namedtuple while good isn't a core part of the API.

        Example
        -------
        >>> NDCube.all_world_coords_values(('lat', 'lon'))
        >>> NDCube.all_world_coords_values(2)

        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    def crop(self,
             lower_corner: Iterable[Union[u.Quantity, float]],

>              upper_corner: Iterable[Union[u.Quantity, float]] = None,

Reviewer: Should ```lower_corner``` and ```upper_corner``` not always be ```u.Quantity```?  Then the ```units``` kwarg could be dropped.  When would a ```float``` + ```units``` be meritted over and above ```u.Quantity```?

             units: Iterable[Union[str, u.Unit]] = None,

>              wcs: BaseHighLevelWCS = None):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
             wcs: BaseHighLevelWCS = None) -> NDCube:
```

        """

>         Crops an NDCube given minimum values and interval widths along axes.

Reviewer: I think the API should take min and max values, not min values and widths.
```suggestion
        Crops an NDCube given minimum and maximum values of intervals along axes.
```

            The length of the iterable must equal the number of data dimensions
            and must have the same order as the data.

        upper_corner
            The maximum desired values along each relevant axis after cropping
            described in physical units consistent with the NDCube's wcs object.
            The length of the iterable must equal the number of data dimensions
            and must have the same order as the data.

        units
            If the inputs are set without units, the user must set the units
            inside this argument as `str` or `~astropy.units.Unit` objects.
            The length of the iterable must equal the number of data dimensions
            and must have the same order as the data.

        wcs
            The WCS to use to calculate the pixel coordinates based on the input.
            Will default to the ``.wcs`` property if not given. While any valid WCS
            could be used it is expected that either the ``.wcs`` or
            ``.extra_coords.wcs`` properties will be used.

        Returns
        -------
        result: NDCube
        """
    
```

> ## Extra Coords

Reviewer 3: I know this is my own ignorance of extra_coords but can you give an example of one such way this is used in the context of for example a certain type of observation?

Reviewer: Say you have a 3-D cube representing a raster scan.  The x-dimension corresponds to longitude in the WCS, but because the raster is compiled by taking an exposure at different slit position sequentially, it also corresponds to time.  If the WCS only have lat, lon, wavelength, you can create a time extra coordinate and assign it to the x-dimension.

Reviewer 3: ah yes I see - is it worth adding this in the SEP just for readers not necessarily familiar?

Reviewer: Sure.  You can suggest a change if you like via GitHub

Reviewer 4: I totally agree with this comment and suggest a whole new section be added which provides examples use case of this API.

Author: I have added a small section with a high level overview of the three classes, however, if you want examples I refer you to the new NDCube docs.

The extra coords property of the `NDCube` class provides a core unique selling point of the package.
It is an easy way to add extra variables which vary with one, or more, of the axes of the data.
The [proposed implementation](https://github.com/sunpy/ndcube/pull/271) of `ExtraCoords` is heavily dependant on [gWCS](https://gwcs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), however, the goal for this SEP is to formulate the high level API and not the implementation details.
This will hopefully allow future iteration on the implementation without breaking the functionality of the `NDCube` class.

```python

class ExtraCoordsABC(abc.ABC):
    """
    A representation of additional world coordinates associated with pixel axes.

    ExtraCoords can be initialised by either specifying a
    `~astropy.wcs.wcsapi.LowLevelWCS` object and a ``mapping``, or it can be
    built up by specifying one or more lookup tables.

    Parameters
    ----------
    wcs
        The WCS specifying the extra coordinates.
    mapping
       The mapping between the array dimensions and pixel dimensions in the

>        extra coords object. This is an iterable of ``(array_dimension, pixel_dimension)`` pairs

Reviewer: What if the extra coord maps from one array dimension to more than one pixel dimension or vice versa?  Can/Should this be supported in this API?

Author: It can not. It can map from one array dimension to many world dimensions, but only a 1:1 mapping between array and pixel inputs is possible. Not having that restriction would completely remove the link back to the actual array in the NDCube.

        lookup_table
            The lookup table.
        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    def keys(self) -> Iterable[str]:
        """
        The world axis names for all the coordinates in the extra coords.
        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    @property
    def mapping(self) -> Iterable[Tuple[int, int]]:
        """
        The mapping between the array dimensions and pixel dimensions.

        This is an iterable of ``(array_dimension, pixel_dimension)`` pairs
        of length equal to the number of pixel dimensions in the extra coords.
        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    @property
    def wcs(self) -> BaseHighLevelWCS:
        """
        A WCS object representing the world coordinates described by this ``ExtraCoords``.

        .. note::
            This WCS object does not map to the pixel dimensions of the array
            associated with the `.NDCube` object. It has the number of
            pixel dimensions equal to the number of inputs to the transforms to
            get the world coordinates (normally equal to the number of world
            coordinates). Therefore using this WCS directly might lead to some

>             confusing results.

Reviewer: This note is a bit confusing.  Can it be clarified?

Author: Do you have a specific suggestion? It's the best I could come up with :rofl:

        """

    @abc.abstractmethod

>     def __getitem__(self, item: Union[str, int, slice, Iterable[Union[str, int, slice]]]) -> "ExtraCoordsABC":

Reviewer: Can slicing by `str` and `int`/`slice` really be suported in the one operation?  Or do you have to do either/or?

Author: it's not actually true you can slice with more than one string.

```suggestion
    def __getitem__(self, item: Union[str, int, slice, Iterable[Union[int, slice]]]) -> "ExtraCoordsABC":
```

# SEP-0012 -- NDCube 2

| SEP           | num                                                     |
|---------------|---------------------------------------------------------|
| title         | NDCube 2                                                |
| author(s)     | [Stuart Mumford](https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4217-4642) |
| contact email | stuart@cadair.com                                       |
| date-creation | 2020-10-13                                              |
| type          | standard                                                |
| discussion    |                                                         |
| status        | discussion                                              |

# Introduction

> This SEP proposes a redesigned API for the next major version of the ndcube package.

Author: ```suggestion
This SEP proposes a redesigned API for the `NDCube` class and associated objects in the next major version of the ndcube package.
```

The primary objective of this SEP is to gather as much community feedback on the proposed API before it is released.
This is also a prelude to a future change, long discussed, to have the `GenericMap` class in sunpy core inherit from `NDCube`.
This SEP should therefore also be considered as a discussion of future changes to the `Map` API, as the API proposed here would eventually (with long deprecation) be adopted by map for the functionality provided here.
That being said, details of the migration of Map to this API are out of scope for this SEP, just a discussion of the eventual API to be adopted.

## Background

> The creation of ndcube was originally motivated by the desire to represent and interrogate multi-dimensional solar datasets, such as those collected with the IRIS satellite.

Reviewer 4: this sentence assumes readers know what IRIS is. This whole section needs more information to onboard people that are not familiar with NDCube.

Reviewer 2: Agreed; I think replacing "IRIS" with a concrete description of such data would be better here. Suggestion below:
```suggestion
The creation of ndcube was originally motivated by the desire to represent and interrogate solar datasets with more than two dimensions, for example two spatial and one spectral (wavelength) dimension.
```

The fundamental objective of the package's primary class, `NDCube`, is to provide a user interface to this data which would **unite the data with the coordinate information describing the data**.
The benefit of `NDCube` is its ability to do array-like operations which also update the coordinate system.
In addition, `NDCube` works hard to provide information to the user that describes their data based on the coordinate system information.
`NDCube` also provides simple summary visualisation support included in the object.
This uses matplotlib to produce quick, coordinate-aware, and interactive visualisations of the data.

> The final major component added in `NDCube` is the concept of "extra coords" which allows the specification and integration with coordinates describing the data not specified by the primary WCS for the cube.

Reviewer 2: This should have a concrete example of where extra coords are used, similar to my suggestion above for a concrete example of the type of data NDCube is motivated by.

During the process of writing NDCube 1.0 a lot of potential functionality which could be added to astropy to improve the WCS support was identified.
In addition to this in-between the release of ndcube 1.0 and the development of 2.0, various long running projects such as the acceptance and implementation of [APE 14](https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/blob/master/APE14.rst) were completed.
This means that once many of these brand new features had been implemented in Astropy and gWCS it provided an excellent opportunity to reassess the state of NDCube and to rebase it onto this new WCS functionality.

The main motivation for updating ndcube to use the APE 14 interface was to provide support for gWCS which is being used by the DKIST user tools.
A lot of the other changes presented in this SEP are a consequence of this decision.

## Summary of Changes from ndcube 1

The fundamental change since the original version of ndcube is that the WCS type has been changed to be the High Level API as described by astropy's APE 14.

> This opens a lot of possibilities to the future uses of `NDCube` as the APE 14 API allows the coordinate system to be described by almost any functional transform.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This opens a lot of possibilities to the future uses of `NDCube` as the APE 14 API allows mapping between data and coordinates to be described by almost any functional transform.
```

> This could be the most common FITS WCS standard, or gWCS or custom implementations for specific facilites with different requirements.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This could be the commonly used FITS WCS standard, gWCS, or custom implementations for specific facilities with different requirements.
```

Having made this change, which was a large breaking change from the original API, we reviewed all the existing functionality and API as it was adapted to use the high level WCS interface and the result is presented below.

# Detailed Description

> The API presented here is limited to the two core classes `NDCubeABC` and `ExtraCoordsABC`.

Reviewer 5: And `GlobalCoordsABC`?

This is primarily an attempt to limit the discussion in this SEP to the core API and not implementation decisions taken in the development of ndcube.
If people are interested in the implementation of the proposed API large amounts of it are implemented on the master branch of the [ndcube repository](https://github.com/sunpy/ndcube) or open pull requests.

> The `NDCube` class inherits the astropy [`NDDataBase`](https://github.com/astropy/astropy/blob/master/astropy/nddata/nddata_base.py#L11) class, including the requirement that the `.wcs` property be a `BaseHighLevelWCS` instance.

Reviewer 2: Is `NDCube` *inheriting* the `.wcs` requirement, or adding that requirement on top of `NDData`?

In the following code snippets of the API use the Python type hint syntax as appropriate to highlight accepted types and return types, these are not enforced at runtime.

## NDCube

Below is a class definition for the Abstract Base Class (ABC) for `NDCube`.
Its purpose is to specify the API as completely as possible, including input and return types. 
The behaviour of all the methods should be described by their included docstrings, a version of this (likely out of sync) has been [PRed to ndcube](https://github.com/sunpy/ndcube/pull/304).

```python

class NDCubeABC(astropy.nddata.NDDataBase):

    @abc.abstractmethod
    def __init__(self,
                 data: "numpy.typing.ArrayLike",

>                  uncertainty: Any = None,

Reviewer 2: Why can this be `Any` and not just a numpy array or `None`?

Reviewer 2: Also how does one take into account that uncertainty could have different units to the data (e.g. data could be in `m`, and uncertainty in `cm`).

Author: This should ideally be the nddata uncertainty type, but nddata doesn't actually *enforce* that type, so `Any` 
is technically correct. `NDCube` doesn't currently do any handling of this at all, it's all done by the base class(es).

Uncertainty handling in astropy is functional but limited, hopefully with this API we can transparently benefit from any improvements made upstream.

>                  mask: Any = None,

Reviewer 2: Again, why is this `Any` and not an array?

Author: This should probably be the same type as data :+1:

Reviewer 2: This doesn't look resolved?

>                  wcs: Union[BaseLowLevelWCS, BaseHighLevelWCS] = None,

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/sunpy/sunpy-SEP/pull/51/files#diff-830ee9fe9aa8dbb374528635d41e0e9d5d3033611eeff5044e411336dd8fd593R56 says the `wcs` is required to be high level, so why does this allow low level?

Author: If you pass a low level it is converted up in the constructor.

                 meta: Mapping = None,
                 unit: Union[str, u.Unit] = None,
                 copy: bool = False,
                 extra_coords: "ExtraCoordsABC" = None):
        pass

    @abc.abstractmethod
    def __getitem__(self, item: Union[int, slice, Iterable[Union[slice, int]]]) -> "NDCubeABC":
        """

>         An ndcube object must be sliceable in a similar way to a numpy array,

Reviewer 2: I think it's wroth noting explicitly that this is indexing by array index, not coordinate value along that dimension (which of course is impossible to do when coorindates and data axes are not aligned)

>         however, support for a `step` is not required and no "fancy indexing" is allowed.

Reviewer 2: - Why isn't support for a step required?
- What is fancy indexing, and again why isn't it allowed?

Author: >     * Why isn't support for a step required?

Because it's very non-trivial to support slicing a WCS with a step in a predictable way. A step array slicing operation does not nicely map to a single operation in world space. Are you asking for a resample operation where the resulting single pixel has the world coordinates of the whole step (i.e. new_cdelt = step * old_cdelt) or are you asking to discretise the WCS so that it has gaps in it?

It is left as "not required" here as a specific subclass of NDCube may be able to make limiting assumptions based on it's usecase and know how to implement it.

> 
>     * What is fancy indexing, and again why isn't it allowed?

Fancy indexing is https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/arrays.indexing.html#advanced-indexing and it's not supported because again it's practically impossible to support without converting the WCS to a full lookup table and also not all array types (Dask) support it either.

Reviewer 2: 👍 I think a (condensed?) version of the above comment should go into the docstring

        When a slice is applied to a NDCube object it must be applied to the following attributes:

          * data
          * wcs
          * uncertainty
          * mask
          * extra_coords

        the following attributes must be copied unaltered to the returned NDCube:

          * unit

>           * meta

Reviewer 2: Won't slicing the cube make some of the metadata invalid (e.g. FITS keywords will need updating?), so `meta` needs to be altered?

Author: Much like with Map the meta is deemed to be a black box which NDCube has no knowledge of. A sensible user of NDCube might choose to remove all the keys from the meta which were used to construct the WCS object as that will be updated.

Reviewer 2: Ah cool, so ideally one would strip all the `WCS` related information out of `meta` anyway, and just leave non-coordinate metadata.

Author: yep.

        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    @property

>     def extra_coords(self) -> ExtraCoordsABC:

Reviewer 4: Exactly what `extra_coords` are should be explained at a high level before this section.

Author: There is always going to be a race condition between parts of this doc, these properties exist and their return values are described in more detail later. If it were to be flipped then the issue would present in reverse, you would have no context for the other classes.

I can add some more context to the top of the document though.

Reviewer 2: I agree with @ehsteve, and there currently isn't any high level introduction to extra coordinates at the top.

        """

>         Coordinates not decribed by ``NDCubeABC.wcs`` which vary along one or more axes.

Reviewer 2: I think it's worth adding a sentence on the motivation for this, instead of just having all coordinates in the wcs.

Author: If it isn't already that motivation should be at the top of the Extra Coords section of the doc.

        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    @property

>     def global_coords(self) -> GlobalCoordsABC:

Reviewer 4: Seeing this for the first time, I have no idea what this is.

Reviewer 2: Agreed again, I think a sentence at the top of this document distinguishing between global and extra coords would be helpful.

    @property
    def combined_wcs(self) -> BaseHighLevelWCS:
        """
        The WCS transform for the NDCube, including the coordinates specified in ``.extra_coords``.

        This transform should implement the high level wcsapi, and have
        `pixel_n_dim` equal to the number of array dimensions in the
        `.NDCube`. The number of world dimensions should be equal to the
        number of world dimensions in ``self.wcs`` and in ``self.extra_coords`` combined.
        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    @property
    def array_axis_physical_types(self) -> Iterable[Tuple[str, ...]]:
        """
        Returns the WCS physical types associated with each array axis.

        Returns an iterable of tuples where each tuple corresponds to an array axis and
        holds strings denoting the WCS physical types associated with that array axis.
        Since multiple physical types can be associated with one array axis, tuples can
        be of different lengths. Likewise, as a single physical type can correspond to
        multiple array axes, the same physical type string can appear in multiple tuples.
        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    def axis_world_coords(self,

>                           *axes: Union[int, str],

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                          *axes: Union[int, str None],
```
Since this can be `None` too?

Author: No, if you don't want an axis here you don't specify it. If you want all axes you specify nothing, if you want a subset you specify which axes you want here.

Reviewer 2: Ah, below it says that one can pass `axes=None` though.

                          edges: bool = False,
                          wcs: Optional[Union[BaseHighLevelWCS, ExtraCoordsABC]] = None
                          ) -> Iterable[Any]:
        """

>         Returns world coordinate values of all pixels for all axes.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        Returns world coordinate objects of all pixels for all axes.
```

>         Returns world coordinate values of all pixels for all axes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        Returns world coordinate values of the pixel centres for all axes.
```

        Parameters
        ----------
        axes

>             Axis number in numpy ordering or unique substring of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            Axis number(s) in numpy ordering or unique substring of
```

            `.NDCube.wcs.world_axis_physical_types` or
            `.NDCube.wcs.world_axis_names` of axes for which real world

>             coordinates are desired. ``axes=None`` implies all axes will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            coordinates are desired. If ``axes`` not supplied all axes will be
```

            returned.

>         edges

Reviewer 2: This needs a definition of what an `edge` is. Is it a 1D edge, or is a (N-1)D surface, e.g. in 3D it would be the 6 2D surfaces on the outside of a cube.

Reviewer: Think of pixels like histogram bins.  If ``edges=False`` (default) coordinate values at the pixel/bin centers is returned.  If ``edges=True`` the coordinate values at the pixel/bin edges will be returned.  So the length of the returned coordinate objects will have a length in each dimension 1 greater than the number of array elements.

The equation/pseudo-code way of thinking of it is if ``edges=False``, the values entered to ``WCS.pixel_to_world`` is ``np.arange(0, n)``.  If ``edges=True`` the pixel values entered are ``np.arange(-0.5, n+0.5)``

Reviewer 2: I would rename this argument `corners` instead of `edges`. In > 1D, `edges` is ambiguous - are the points on one edge halfway along the pixels in the other dimension, or at the corners?  `corners` is un-ambiguous in this respect.

Author: I like that suggestion. This being Danny's corner of the API I will let him comment before implementing that.

Reviewer: To me, `corners` suggests the values at the lower edge of the first pixel and the upper edge of the last pixel in each array dimension.  So for a 2-D cube, no matter how many pixels you have, I would expect `corners` to return coords at only 4 pixel locations.  Whereas `edges=True` should return the real world coords at the edges of all pixels, as opposed to the default of pixel centers.

I suggest `pixel_edges`.

Reviewer 2: How about `pixel_corners`? I still think `pixel_edges` is ambiguous, as an edge is a continuous set of points, whereas a corner is a well defined single point.

Reviewer: Ah, I see your point when you talk about an edge as a continuous set of points.  This is true when ndim > 1 and the axes are dependent.  I was coming from the idea that axes are independent and so pixels can be separated into 1-D bins, like in a 1-D histogram.  In this case we talk about bin centers and bin edges.  The continuous edge collapses to a single point.

Having thought it through some more, I am OK with `pixel_corners` as it is probably slightly more generalised.  But I think we will have some users for whom this will be a bit less less intuitive.

            The edges argument helps in returning ``pixel_edges``
            instead of ``pixel_values``. Default value is False,

>             which returns ``pixel_values``. True return ``pixel_edges``

Reviewer 2: This reads weird at the moment, mabye something like:

> If `False`, return coordinate values at all pixels in the array. If `True`, only return coordinate values of the pixels at the edges of the array.

Author: I agree this is unclear, but I don't think your suggestion is correct. This is returning the values at pixel centre or between pixels (edges) I believe. @danryanirish

>             which returns ``pixel_values``. True return ``pixel_edges``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            which returns ``pixel centers``. True returns ``pixel_edges``
```

>         wcs

Reviewer 2: Why allow passing an arbitrary `wcs`, when this object has `self.wcs`?

Author: This isn't really intended to be a truly arbitary WCS (although in theory it could be), it's really intended to be one of `self.wcs`, `self.combined_wcs` or `self.extra_coords`, as a way to limit which coords you are interested in.

Reviewer 2: What's the motivation for allowing that, instead of just doing it on `self.combined_wcs`, and letting the user use the coordinates they want from the full output?

Author: This wcs flag is a bit of an afterthought, mainly added due to implementation concerns with `combined_wcs`. It makes less sense for `axis_world_coords[_values]` than it does for `crop`, because there is a simple way to restrict the return anyway. The only real motivation for it being here is it currently has a pretty large performance overhead.

[for crop using `combined_wcs` is very clunky as there is currently no de-duplication of world coordinates when running through `wcs.world_to_pixel`, so you have to specify *all* the world coordinates even if that's more than the number of pixel dimensions.]

In the discussions @DanRyanIrish and I have had about the `wcs=` argument, we have posited it as something which could be considered for deprecation when the implementation of `combined_wcs` is better.

Reviewer 2: I'm still confused; can you give a concrete example of when and how one would use this?

Author: I have added a paragraph discussing this further up, I suggest further discussions on the merit of `combined_wcs` go there.

            The WCS object to used to calculate the world coordinates.
            Although technically this can be any valid WCS, it will typically be
            ``self.wcs``, ``self.extra_coords``, or ``self.combined_wcs``, combing both
            the WCS and extra coords.
            Default=self.wcs

        Returns
        -------
        axes_coords

>             High level object, or iterable thereof, giving the real world

Reviewer 2: Should there be a requirement on this high level object for it to be the same shape as the data array?

Author: yes, that should be added, each element of the return should have the same shape as it's corresponding pixel axes. Having said that the return values here should be calculated by the wcs object.

            coords for the axes requested by user.

>             For example, SkyCoords. The types returned are determined by the WCS object.

Reviewer 2: I'm confused as to how one gets a full `SkyCoord` out when doing `NDCube.all_world_coords(('lat', 'lon'))`? Wouldn't this example return a 2-tuple of `Qauntity`s?

Author: No, that would be the output of `axis_world_coords_values`. This number of return elements of this method is dependant on the wcs used (specifically the `world_axis_object_components` property of the wcs). Generally, this means that lat and lon will always be returned together in a SkyCoord and you would be unable to get a single one out of this method. i.e. `lat, lon`, `lat` and `lon` would all have the same output.

        Example
        -------
        >>> NDCube.all_world_coords(('lat', 'lon'))
        >>> NDCube.all_world_coords(2)

        """

    @abc.abstractmethod

>     def axis_world_coords_values(self,

Reviewer 4: I understand that you are using nomenclature that is used for WCS but it is confusing to me given that I understand values in the context of quantities which are also used here. A value for a coordinate is a quantity, while a value for a quantity is a number. Might be nice to say this somewhere in the intro.

>     def axis_world_coords_values(self,

Reviewer 2: Can't this have a concrete implementation in this base class that just calls `axis_world_coords` with all the axes?

Author: The docstring here is misleading. The difference between this and the not-`_values` variant is the return types are `Quantity` objects not the "high level" classes specified in the WCS.

>                                  *axes: Union[int, str],

Reviewer 2: Why is `axes` an input if all this returns the coordinates of all axes?

Author: It doesn't, it has the same semantics as `axis_world_coords`.

                                 edges: bool = False,
                                 wcs: Optional[Union[BaseHighLevelWCS, ExtraCoordsABC]] = None
                                 ) -> Iterable[u.Quantity]:
        """

>         Returns world coordinate values of all pixels for all axes.

Author: TODO: fix this.

            `.NDCube.wcs.world_axis_physical_types` or
            `.NDCube.wcs.world_axis_names` of axes for which real world
            coordinates are desired. ``axes=None`` implies all axes will be
            returned.

        edges
            The edges argument helps in returning ``pixel_edges``
            instead of ``pixel_values``. Default value is False,
            which returns ``pixel_values``. True return ``pixel_edges``

        wcs
            The WCS object to used to calculate the world coordinates.
            Although technically this can be any valid WCS, it will typically be
            ``self.wcs``, ``self.extra_coords``, or ``self.combined_wcs``, combing both
            the WCS and extra coords.
            Default=self.wcs

        Returns
        -------
        axes_coords
            `~astropy.units.Quantity` or iterable thereof for all requested
            world axes, units determined by the wcs.  # TODO: Should we mandate namedtuple?

        Example
        -------
        >>> NDCube.all_world_coords_values(('lat', 'lon'))
        >>> NDCube.all_world_coords_values(2)

        """

    @abc.abstractmethod

>     def crop(self,

Reviewer 2: Having personally had fun with inputs to `submap` in sunpy, this needs a much tighter definition. In particular

- Given a coordinate that lies in a pixel, is that pixel included or not in the cropped result?
- Are the edges of the cropping done using parallel N-1D planes in pixel space, or coordinate space? My guess is pixel space, but this needs to be explicitly stated.

Reviewer: This method currently includes pixels that contain the lower and upper corner values.  The justification is that in array slicing all elements strictly less than the upper index are returned.  However, depending on where in the pixel the ``upper_corner`` value falls, there may be some real world values < ``upper_corner`` AND > ``edge of the returned cube``.  The only way to avoid this it to include ``upper_corner`` in the returned cube. 

I think the way to define he behavior is that this method:
* returns the smallest cube (in pixel space) that includes the entire real world region of interest defined by ``lower_corner`` and ``upper_corner``.
* If the region of interest extends beyond the FOV of the cube in a given dimension, everything up to the edge of the cube along that dimension is returned.  Padding array elements are not generated.
* If there is no overlap between the cube and the region of interest, in `IndexError` is raised.

This behavior is analogous to the behavior of numpy slicing except the the upper limit pixel is included:
```python
>>> np.arange(4)[1:3]  # OK
>>> np.arange(4)[1:10] # OK
>>> np.arange(4)[5:10] # Raises an IndexError

Reviewer 2: How is "entire real world region of interest" defined? Is it a cube in coordinate space? And then you choose the smallest cube in pixel space that contains the cube in coordinate space?

If my interpretation is correct, this is *not* how `submap` in sunpy works - there the cropped area is simply a square in pixel space, with corners given by the `bottom_left` and `top_right` coordinates.

Reviewer: > How is "entire real world region of interest" defined? Is it a cube in coordinate space? And then you choose the smallest cube in pixel space that contains the cube in coordinate space?

Yes.  That's exactly it.

> If my interpretation is correct, this is _not_ how `submap` in sunpy works - there the cropped area is simply a square in pixel space, with corners given by the `bottom_left` and `top_right` coordinates. Not an issue, but just thought I'd mention it.

Unless you resample the data I don't think it's generally possible to do it another way to how `NDCube.crop` does it.  The exception would be the degenerate case where all the world coordinates are aligned with the array axes, in which case what `NDCube.crop` does is equivalent.  I didn't think `submap` resampled the data but I could be wrong.

Reviewer 2: I there might be a bit of confusion; this is the way `submap` works:

1. Convert `bottom_left_coord` and `top_right_coord` to array indices
2. Return `data[bottom_left_idx[0]:top_right_idx[0], bottom_left_idx[1], top_right_idx[1]]`

No resampling or or interpolating, because one just returns a cube in pixel space. Am I right in thinking that the method proposed here for `crop` is:

1. Find all pixels with
```
(lower_corner[0] <= coordinate[0] <= upper_corner[0]) and
(lower_corner[1] <= coordinate[1] <= upper_corner[1]) and
...
```
This is not a cube in data/pixel space, and actually needs a much tighter definition to take into account the finite size of pixels, and there might be tricky edge cases with highly non-linear data > coordinate transformations that need to be worked out.

2. Find the smallest cube in data/pixel space that contains all of these pixels

Reviewer 6: From the doc I'm unsure if the interval defined by `lower_corner` and `upper_corner` should be interpreted as `lower_corner[0] <= coordinate[0] <= upper_corner[0]` or `lower_corner[0] <= coordinate[0] < upper_corner[0]` similar to @dstansby comments above. But additionally it's not clear to me what value is used for the comparison, I assume it's the pixel centres but that's not explicitly stated and probably should be if it is?

Reviewer: The implementation of crop is very similar, if not the same as @dstansby's description above of `submap`.  Edge cases may be handled differently.  To clarify here is the proposed implementation:

1. Convert `lower_corner_coords` and `upper_corner_coords` to array indices, `lower_corner_idx` and `upper_corner_idx`.  The conversion to array indices always round down to the nearest whole index.  If we think of pixels as bins then in the `i`th dimensions, this means `lower_corner_idx[i]` corresponds to the lower edge of the bin/pixel containing `lower_corner_coords[i]` and `upper_corner_idx[i] + 1` corresponds to the upper edge of the bin/pixel containing `upper_corner_coords[i]`
2. Return `data[lower_corner_idx[0] : upper_corner_idx[0] + 1, ...]` (as so on for higher dimensions).  Note that using `upper_corner_idx[i] + 1` means that the upper corner given by the user will always be included in the returned cube.

### Edge Cases
* If `lower_corner_coords[i]` is below the range of the cube, set `lower_corner_idx = 0`.  So in this case an error is not raised.  `crop` returns as much of the region of interest as it can give the cube's limits.
* If `upper_corner_idx[i]` is greater than the axis length return as much of the region of interest as possible given the cube's limits.  Do not raise an error.  (Analogous to the above bullet on the upper side.)
* If `lower_corner_idx[i]` greater than the axis length, then none of the region of interest along the `i`th axis is within the cube.  Raise an `IndexError`.

@dstansby, @samaloney, does this make it clearer?

Author: I have added a comment to the docstring clarifying that this works like submap and is therefore subject to the issues laid out in https://github.com/sunpy/sunpy/issues/4896.

I think we can consider fixing that a feature request for the future.

This will hopefully allow future iteration on the implementation without breaking the functionality of the `NDCube` class.

```python

class ExtraCoordsABC(abc.ABC):
    """
    A representation of additional world coordinates associated with pixel axes.

    ExtraCoords can be initialised by either specifying a
    `~astropy.wcs.wcsapi.LowLevelWCS` object and a ``mapping``, or it can be
    built up by specifying one or more lookup tables.

    Parameters
    ----------
    wcs
        The WCS specifying the extra coordinates.
    mapping
       The mapping between the array dimensions and pixel dimensions in the
       extra coords object. This is an iterable of ``(array_dimension, pixel_dimension)`` pairs
       of length equal to the number of pixel dimensions in the extra coords.

    """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    def __init__(self,
                 *,
                 wcs: BaseLowLevelWCS = None,
                 mapping: Iterable[Tuple[int, int]] = None):
        pass

    @abc.abstractmethod

>     def add_coordinate(self,
>                        name: str,
>                        array_dimension: Union[int, Iterable[int]],
>                        lookup_table: Any,
>                        **kwargs):

Author: Proposed change to match the API of `GlobalCoords`:
```suggestion
    def add(self,
            name: str,
            array_dimension: Union[int, Iterable[int]],
            lookup_table: Any,
            **kwargs):
```

        Add a coordinate to this ``ExtraCoords`` based on a lookup table.

        Parameters
        ----------
        name
            The name for this coordinate(s).
        array_dimension
            The pixel dimension(s), in the array, to which this lookup table corresponds.
        lookup_table
            The lookup table.
        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    def keys(self) -> Iterable[str]:
        """
        The world axis names for all the coordinates in the extra coords.
        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    @property
    def mapping(self) -> Iterable[Tuple[int, int]]:
        """
        The mapping between the array dimensions and pixel dimensions.

        This is an iterable of ``(array_dimension, pixel_dimension)`` pairs
        of length equal to the number of pixel dimensions in the extra coords.
        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    @property
    def wcs(self) -> BaseHighLevelWCS:
        """
        A WCS object representing the world coordinates described by this ``ExtraCoords``.

        .. note::
            This WCS object does not map to the pixel dimensions of the array
            associated with the `.NDCube` object. It has the number of

>             pixel dimensions equal to the number of inputs to the transforms to
>             get the world coordinates (normally equal to the number of world

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            pixel dimensions equal to the number of inputs to the world coordinate transforms
            (normally equal to the number of world
```

>             coordinates). Therefore using this WCS directly might lead to some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            coordinates). Therefore using this WCS directly with the NDCube's methods, e.g. crop, might lead to some
```

Author: This suggestion is incorrect, the NDCube object should know how to handle it, people using it outside of that context should be wary.

This class is only a slight extension of the API for an immutable dictionary, to enable the tracking of the physical type of the coordinate as well as it's name and value.
The class behaves like a mapping between coordinate name and coordinate object for all read operations.

```python

from collections.abc import Mapping

class GlobalCoordsABC(Mapping):
    """
    A structured representation of coordinate information applicable to a whole NDCube.

    This class acts as a mapping between coordinate name and the coordinate object.
    In addition to this a physical type is stored for each coordinate name.
    A concrete implementation of this class must furfill the `Mapping` ABC,
    including methods such as `__iter__` and `__len__`.

    Parameters
    ----------
    ndcube : `.NDCube`, optional
        The parent ndcube for this object. Used to extract global coordinates
        from the wcs and extra coords of the ndcube. If not specified only
        coordinates explicitly added will be shown.
    """
    def __init__(self, ndcube: Optional[NDCubeABC] = None):
        pass

>     def add(self,

Author: Cross posting from https://github.com/sunpy/ndcube/issues/348

@DanRyanIrish suggests this be renamed `add_coordinate` to match the `ExtraCoords` class, I would also in tandem rename `remove` to `remove_coordinate`.

Author: I am in favour of this proposal :+1:

Reviewer 7: Me too, looks nice 👍

Reviewer: Alternatively, `ExtraCoords.add_coordinate` can be changed to `.add`.  I think that's nice and clean.

Author: https://github.com/sunpy/sunpy-SEP/pull/51/files#r533333588

            name: str,
            physical_type: str,
            coord: Any
            ):
        """
        Add a new coordinate to the collection.

        Parameters
        ----------
        name
            The name for the coordinate.
        physical_type
            An IOVA UCD1+ physical type description for the coordinate
            (http://www.ivoa.net/documents/latest/UCDlist.html). If no matching UCD
            type exists, this can instead be ``"custom:xxx"``, where ``xxx`` is an
            arbitrary string. If not known, can be `None`.
        coord
            The object describing the coordinate value, for example a
            `~astropy.units.Quantity` or a `~astropy.coordinates.SkyCoord`.
        """

    def remove(self, name: str):
        """
        Remove a coordinate from the collection.
        """

    @property
    def physical_types(self):
        """
        A mapping of names to physical types for each coordinate.
        """

    def __getitem__(self, item: str):
        """
        Indexing the object by name should return the coordinate object.
        """

> ```

Reviewer 4: A section that describes edge cases and errors would be useful to gather feedback on as well and should be added here. For example, what if a user crops to values that are not in an image? Should the result be an error or an empty array? People would likely expect certain behaviors based on their intuition and it would be good to gather that feedback.

Author: Is this comment aimed at just this `GlobalCoords` class or more general with NDCube and both this and `ExtraCoords`?

    def __getitem__(self, item: Union[int, slice, Iterable[Union[slice, int]]]) -> "NDCubeABC":
        """
        Slice the NDCube object by array index.

        An ndcube object must be sliceable in a similar way to a numpy array,
        however, support for a `step` is not required and no "fancy indexing" is allowed.

        A step is prohibited due to the abiguity inherent in applying a step to the WCS
        object; does the step mean a sampling so the coordinate axis becomes discontinuious
        or does it mean that the size of the pixels should be increased by a factor of the step.

        Fancy indexing, or
        `advanced indexing <https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/arrays.indexing.html#advanced-indexing>`__
        is not supported both due to similar issues with applying it to the WCS, as
        well as it being poorly supported outside of numpy arrays.

        When a slice is applied to a NDCube object it must be applied to the following attributes:

          * data
          * wcs
          * uncertainty
          * mask
          * extra_coords

        the following attributes must be copied unaltered to the returned NDCube:

          * unit

>           * meta

Reviewer: I think this is too strict in the case of `.meta`.  Slicing of .`meta` should be optional.

        """
        Coordinates not decribed by ``NDCubeABC.wcs`` which vary along one or more axes.
        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    @property
    def global_coords(self) -> GlobalCoordsABC:
        """
        Coordinate metadata which applies to the whole cube.
        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    @property
    def wcs(self) -> BaseHighLevelWCS:
        """
        The WCS transform for the NDCube.

        If a `BaseLowLevelWCS` is provided to the constructor it should be
        "upgraded" to a high level object.
        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    @property
    def combined_wcs(self) -> BaseHighLevelWCS:
        """
        The WCS transform for the NDCube, including the coordinates specified in ``.extra_coords``.

        This transform should implement the high level wcsapi, and have
        `pixel_n_dim` equal to the number of array dimensions in the
        `.NDCube`. The number of world dimensions should be equal to the
        number of world dimensions in ``self.wcs`` and in ``self.extra_coords`` combined.
        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    @property
    def array_axis_physical_types(self) -> Iterable[Tuple[str, ...]]:
        """

>         Returns the WCS physical types associated with each array axis.

Author: Yeah I think that's a good improvement. One could argue that for a reasonably aligned grid the rate of change of one of the spatial dimensions could be vanishingly small but it would still be in this list. It still technically varies with the axis though!

            `.NDCube.wcs.world_axis_names` of axes for which real world
            coordinates are desired. Not specifiying axes implies all axes will be
            returned.

        edges
            If `True` then instead of returning the coordinates of the pixel
            centers the coordinates of the pixel edges will be returned.

        wcs
            The WCS object to used to calculate the world coordinates.
            Although technically this can be any valid WCS, it will typically be
            ``self.wcs``, ``self.extra_coords``, or ``self.combined_wcs``, combing both
            the WCS and extra coords.
            Default=self.wcs

        Returns
        -------
        axes_coords
            High level object, or iterable thereof, giving the real world
            coords for the axes requested by user.
            For example, SkyCoords. The types returned are determined by the WCS object.
            The dimensionality of these objects should match that of their corresponding array dimensions.

        Example
        -------
        >>> NDCube.all_world_coords(('lat', 'lon'))
        >>> NDCube.all_world_coords(2)

        """

    @abc.abstractmethod

>     def axis_world_coords_values(self,

Author: In theory yes, but that mapping isn't always clear. For complex WCSes the mapping back from the objects returned to the array coordinates isn't always obvious and it's hard to predict how to extract the values from the objects. Much like why this split is in APE 14 (where the nomenclature comes from) for a reason it is duplicated here because some times you want one and sometimes you want the other.

            Alternatively, `None`, can be provided instead of a higher level object.
            In this case, the corresponding array axes will be cropped starting from
            0th array index.

        upper_corner
            An iterable of length-1 astropy higher level objects, e.g. SkyCoord,
            representing the real world coordinates of the upper corner of
            the region of interest.
            These are input to ``wcs.world_to_array_index``
            so their number and order must be compatible with the API of that method.
            Alternatively, `None`, can be provided instead of a higher level object.
            In this case, the corresponding array axes will be cropped to include
            the final array index.

        wcs
            The WCS to use to calculate the pixel coordinates based on the input.
            Will default to the ``.wcs`` property if not given. While any valid WCS
            could be used it is expected that either the ``.wcs`` or
            ``.extra_coords.wcs`` properties will be used.

        Returns
        -------
        result: NDCube
        """

    @abc.abstractmethod

>     def crop_by_values(self,

Reviewer 2: Maybe nicer names for this and the above method would be `crop_along_coords` and `crop_along_array` or similar, to distinguish them?

Reviewer 2: Oh hold on, do these methods do exactly the same thing, but with different input? If so, they should be cross-referenced in their docstrings.

Author: both the crop methods crop by the world coordinate, they just vary as to if they use the object notation or not. I will clarify the docstring.

            name: str,
            array_dimension: Union[int, Iterable[int]],
            lookup_table: Any,
            **kwargs):
        """
        Add a coordinate to this ``ExtraCoords`` based on a lookup table.

        Parameters
        ----------
        name
            The name for this coordinate(s).
        array_dimension
            The pixel dimension(s), in the array, to which this lookup table corresponds.
        lookup_table
            The lookup table.
        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    def keys(self) -> Iterable[str]:
        """
        The world axis names for all the coordinates in the extra coords.
        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    @property
    def mapping(self) -> Iterable[Tuple[int, int]]:
        """
        The mapping between the array dimensions and pixel dimensions.

        This is an iterable of ``(array_dimension, pixel_dimension)`` pairs
        of length equal to the number of pixel dimensions in the extra coords.
        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    @property
    def wcs(self) -> BaseHighLevelWCS:
        """
        A WCS object representing the world coordinates described by this ``ExtraCoords``.

        .. note::

>             This WCS object does not map to the pixel dimensions of the array
>             associated with the `.NDCube` object. It has the number of
>             pixel dimensions equal to the number of inputs to the world coordinate
>             transforms (normally equal to the number of world
>             coordinates). Therefore using this WCS directly might lead to some
>             confusing results.

Reviewer: How's this?

```suggestion
            This WCS object does not map to the pixel dimensions of the data array
            in the `.NDCube` object. It only includes pixel dimensions associated
            with the extra coordinates.  For example, if there is only one extra coordinate
            associated with a single pixel dimension, this WCS will only have 1 pixel dimension,
            even if the `.NDCube` object has a data array of 2-D or greater.
            Therefore using this WCS directly might lead to some confusing results.
```

## Background

The creation of ndcube was originally motivated by the desire to represent and interrogate solar datasets with more than two dimensions, for example two spatial and one spectral (wavelength) dimension.
The fundamental objective of the package's primary class, `NDCube`, is to provide a user interface to this data which would **unite the data with the coordinate information describing the data**.
The benefit of `NDCube` is its ability to do array-like operations which also update the coordinate system.
In addition, `NDCube` works hard to provide information to the user that describes their data based on the coordinate system information.
`NDCube` also provides simple summary visualisation support included in the object.
This uses matplotlib to produce quick, coordinate-aware, and interactive visualisations of the data.
The final major component added in `NDCube` is the concept of "extra coords" which allows the specification and integration with coordinates describing the data not specified by the primary WCS for the cube.

## ndcube 2

> ndcube 1.0 was built on the functionality which existed in astropy at the time and provides a very useful foundation for tools such as the sunraster package as well as other efforts to handle multi-dimensional data in Python.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
ndcube 1.0 was built on the functionality which existed in astropy at the time and provides a very useful foundation for tools such as the [sunraster package](https://github.com/sunpy/sunraster) as well as other efforts to handle multi-dimensional data in Python.
```

During the process of writing NDCube 1.0 a lot of potential functionality which could be added to astropy to improve the WCS support was identified.

> In addition to this in-between the release of ndcube 1.0 and the development of 2.0, various long running projects such as the acceptance and implementation of [APE 14](https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/blob/master/APE14.rst) were completed.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
In addition to this in-between the release of ndcube 1.0 and the development of 2.0, various long running projects such as the acceptance and implementation of [APE 14: "A shared Python interface for World Coordinate Systems"](https://github.com/astropy/astropy-APEs/blob/master/APE14.rst) were completed.
```

This opens a lot of possibilities to the future uses of `NDCube` as the APE 14 API allows the mapping between pixel and world coordinates to be described by almost any functional transform.
This could be the commonly used FITS WCS standard, or gWCS or custom implementations for specific facilities with different requirements.

Having made this change, which was a large breaking change from the original API, we reviewed all the existing functionality and API as it was adapted to use the high level WCS interface and the result is presented below.

# Detailed Description

The API presented here is limited to the three core classes `NDCubeABC`, `ExtraCoordsABC` and `GlobalCoordsABC`.
This is primarily an attempt to limit the discussion in this SEP to the core API and not implementation decisions taken in the development of ndcube.
If people are interested in the implementation of the proposed API large amounts of it are implemented on the master branch of the [ndcube repository](https://github.com/sunpy/ndcube) or open pull requests.

> The `NDCube` class inherits the astropy [`NDDataBase`](https://github.com/astropy/astropy/blob/master/astropy/nddata/nddata_base.py#L11) class, including inheriting the requirement that the `.wcs` property be a `BaseHighLevelWCS` instance.

Reviewer 8: Updating the link to "today's" version of `master` in astropy as that ref may change in the future.
```suggestion
The `NDCube` class inherits the astropy [`NDDataBase`](https://github.com/astropy/astropy/blob/e4405974c1d78f48230a6736a25286fb04407527/astropy/nddata/nddata_base.py#L11) class, including inheriting the requirement that the `.wcs` property be a `BaseHighLevelWCS` instance.
```

In the following code snippets of the API use the Python type hint syntax as appropriate to highlight accepted types and return types, these are not enforced at runtime.

## Overview

Before jumping into the details of the API, this section will provide a *brief* high level summary of the way the following three classes interact.
For a detailed introduction to the whole `ndcube` package please see the [ndcube documentation](https://docs.sunpy.org/projects/ndcube/en/v2.0.0b2/introduction.html), a high level familiarity with the package is assumed in the rest of this SEP.

> The `NDCube` object inherits from `astropy.nddata.NDData` and is a container which holds an array, a WCS and extra information about the array like a mask, unit, uncertainty etc.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The `NDCube` object inherits from `astropy.nddata.NDData` and is a container which holds an array, a WCS and extra information about the array like a mask, unit, uncertainty, etc.
```

A concrete example of this in solar physics is a rastering spectrograph, where one of the spatial axes (the array axis along which the raster is built) also has a time coordinate, this coordinate is not normally included in the WCS.

The second added component, new in 2.0, is the `GlobalCoords` class.
This class, in the same way as `ExtraCoords` holds additional coordinate information, however, the main difference is that `GlobalCoords` are not associated with an axes of the array.
This, almost always, means they are scalars; for example a point in space or a time.
This `gobal_coords` attribute could hold the HPC coordinate of a line spectra, or the time of a map in a way which allows predictable programmatic access to this metadata.
The other thing which is implemented in ndcube, is that when the array is slice such that a dimension is dropped, the coordinate from that axis of the WCS is added automatically to `GlobalCoords`, meaning this metadata is not lost.

### On WCSes

The API specification below includes three distinct WCS like objects (all conforming to the Astropy WCS API).
These are `.wcs`, `.extra_coords` and `.combined_wcs`.

> The `.wcs` attribute is the main WCS object for the array; it is required that it have the same number of pixel dimensions as there are array dimensions, the number of world dimensions is arbitrary.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
The `.wcs` attribute is the main WCS object for the array; it is required that it has the same number of pixel dimensions as there are array dimensions, the number of world dimensions is arbitrary.
```

The `.extra_coords` object implements the WCS API but is not required to be a valid WCS for the whole array; the number of pixel dimensions do not have to match the number of array dimensions.

> This is because the user can add as many coordinates to the extra coords as is needed, the `ExtraCoords` object then keeps a mapping of the pixel dimensions in it's WCS to the array dimensions in the `NDCube` object.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
This is because the user can add as many coordinates to the extra coords as is needed, the `ExtraCoords` object then keeps a mapping of the pixel dimensions in its WCS to the array dimensions in the `NDCube` object.
```

> Finally, there is the `.combined_wcs`, this is a APE 14 WCS object which combines the coordinates in the `.wcs` and the `.extra_coords` properties.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
Finally, there is the `.combined_wcs`, this is an APE 14 WCS object which combines the coordinates in the `.wcs` and the `.extra_coords` properties.
```

In an ideal world, this API would propose using the `.combined_wcs` property as the default for all the WCS operations supported by the `NDCube` API.
This however, is not currently practical, due to implementation challenges.

> While a robust and performant implementation of `.combined_wcs` is something to be desired, blocking the release of ndcube 2.0 on it would be foolish, therefore this API in its current form makes it's use optional.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
While a robust and performant implementation of `.combined_wcs` is something to be desired, blocking the release of ndcube 2.0 on it would be foolish, therefore this API in its current form makes its use optional.
```

            associated with a single pixel dimension, this WCS will only have 1 pixel dimension,
            even if the `.NDCube` object has a data array of 2-D or greater.
            Therefore using this WCS directly might lead to some confusing results.

        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    def __getitem__(self, item: Union[str, int, slice, Iterable[Union[int, slice]]]) -> "ExtraCoordsABC":
        """
        ExtraCoords can be sliced with either a string, or a numpy like slice.

        When sliced with a string it should return a new ExtraCoords object
        with only those coordinates with the given names. When sliced with a
        numpy array like slice it should return a new ExtraCoords with the
        slice applied. Supporting step is not required and "fancy indexing" is
        not supported.
        """
```

## Global Coords

The final part of the `NDCube` API is a class to provide structured metadata for coordinate values which are applicable to the whole cube.
One possible use (not mandated by this SEP) is to have any coordinates dropped by a slicing operation on a higher dimensionality cube be tracked here.

> This class is only a slight extension of the API for an immutable dictionary, to enable the tracking of the physical type of the coordinate as well as it's name and value.

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
This class is only a slight extension of the API for an immutable dictionary, to enable the tracking of the physical type of the coordinate as well as its name and value.
```

```python

from collections.abc import Mapping

class GlobalCoordsABC(Mapping):
    """
    A structured representation of coordinate information applicable to a whole NDCube.

    This class acts as a mapping between coordinate name and the coordinate object.
    In addition to this a physical type is stored for each coordinate name.
    A concrete implementation of this class must furfill the `Mapping` ABC,
    including methods such as `__iter__` and `__len__`.

    Parameters
    ----------
    ndcube : `.NDCube`, optional
        The parent ndcube for this object. Used to extract global coordinates
        from the wcs and extra coords of the ndcube. If not specified only
        coordinates explicitly added will be shown.
    """
    def __init__(self, ndcube: Optional[NDCubeABC] = None):
        self._ndcube = ndcube

    def add(self,
            name: str,
            physical_type: str,
            coord: Any
            ):
        """
        Add a new coordinate to the collection.

        Parameters
        ----------
        name
            The name for the coordinate.
        physical_type

>             An IOVA UCD1+ physical type description for the coordinate
>             (http://www.ivoa.net/documents/latest/UCDlist.html). If no matching UCD

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
            An `IOVA UCD1+ physical type description for the coordinate
            <http://www.ivoa.net/documents/latest/UCDlist.html>`__. If no matching UCD
```

            type exists, this can instead be ``"custom:xxx"``, where ``xxx`` is an

>             arbitrary string. If not known, can be `None`.

Reviewer 8: Not sure what are the options here: String `"custom:None"`, `"None"`, or `None`?

Author: The options are one of the valid UCD1+ ids, any string prefixed with `"custom:"` or the `None` type if no physical type information is known.

            ``self.wcs``, ``self.extra_coords``, or ``self.combined_wcs``, combing both
            the WCS and extra coords.
            Default=self.wcs

        Returns
        -------
        axes_coords
            `~astropy.units.Quantity` or iterable thereof for all requested
            world axes, units determined by the wcs.

        Example
        -------
        >>> NDCube.all_world_coords_values(('lat', 'lon'))
        >>> NDCube.all_world_coords_values(2)

        """

    @abc.abstractmethod
    def crop(self,
             lower_corner: Iterable[Union[Any, None]],
             upper_corner: Iterable[Union[Any, None]],
             wcs: Optional[Union[BaseHighLevelWCS, ExtraCoordsABC]] = None
             ) -> NDCubeABC:
        """
        Crop given world coordinate objects describing the lower and upper corners of a region.

        The region of interest is defined in pixel space, by converting the world
        coordinates of the corners to pixel coordinates and then cropping the
        smallest pixel region which contains the corners specified.
        This means that the edges of the world coordinate region specified by

>         the coordinates are not gaureented to be included in the cropped output.
>         This is normally noiticable when cropping a celestial coordinate in a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        the coordinates are not guaranteed to be included in the cropped output.
        This is normally noticeable when cropping a celestial coordinate in a
```

    @abc.abstractmethod
    def crop(self,
             *points: Iterable[Any],
             wcs: Optional[Union[BaseHighLevelWCS, ExtraCoordsABC]] = None
             ) -> NDCubeABC:
        """

>         Crop to the smallest cube containing the world coordinate points.

Reviewer: To make clear earlier that this needs high level objects, while keeping the first lines short, what about doing this?
```
Crop to the smallest cube containing the world coordinate points.

World coordinates must be described by high-level coordinate objects.

Parameters
----------
```

And then something analogous for `crop_by_coords`

Author: I think it's probably fine, as is here. We can polish it in ndcube?

Reviewer: Perhaps also this line should mention that the cropping is still done in pixel space, e.g.
`Crop to the smallest cube in pixel space containing the world coordinate points.`

             wcs: Optional[Union[BaseHighLevelWCS, ExtraCoordsABC]] = None
             ) -> NDCubeABC:
        """
        Crop given world coordinate objects describing the lower and upper corners of a region.

        The region of interest is defined in pixel space, by converting the world
        coordinates of the corners to pixel coordinates and then cropping the
        smallest pixel region which contains the corners specified.
        This means that the edges of the world coordinate region specified by
        the coordinates are not gaureented to be included in the cropped output.
        This is normally noiticable when cropping a celestial coordinate in a

>         frame which differs from the native frame of the coordinates in the WCS.

Reviewer: What impact does defining this in the SEP have on future changes to ndcube which more rigorously identifies the region of interest, e.g. one that does include the whole region defined in a different coordinate frame?

Reviewer 6: > not gaureented to be included
I don't see an issue if in future they are then that ok? But removal is fine too, I would probably fix the spelling if it is staying guaranteed 😆

Reviewer: How about this?
```
The region of interest is defined in pixel-space based on the world coordinates input as the region's corners.
```

Author: I think I am pro that, want to add a suggestion for that?

(To be clear I have added a version of this sentence to NDCube proper)

Author: I have just pushed a commit with this wording in, and an extra sentence being explicit about the fact we aren't specifying the algorithm in here.

        """

>         Crop given world coordinate objects describing the lower and upper corners of a region.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Crop the cube to a region that includes given world coordinates defined by high-level objects.
```

This frees us from explicitly committing to the inputs representing corners. All this commits us to is that the cropped region will include the input coordinates.

                       wcs: Optional[Union[BaseHighLevelWCS, ExtraCoordsABC]] = None
                       ) -> NDCubeABC:
        """

>         Crops an NDCube given world coordinate values describing the lower and upper corners of a region.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Crops the cube to a region that includes given world coordinate values.
```
Same reasoning as above.
